[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> "Thinking Aloud"--
conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist Jeffrey
Mishlove.
>> Hello, and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Our topic today is
society in transition.
My guest is Jean Houston,
one of the world's
great penetrating minds,
psychologists, social thinker,
agent of transformation.
She is author of
17 books, including
the "Hero and the Goddess," "The
Passion of Isis and Osiris,"
"The Possible Human-- a
passion for the possible,"
"In Search of the
Beloved," and "Jump Time."
She is also director of the
Foundation for Mind Research
and is a consultant
with world leaders
and great thinkers
from all countries.
Welcome, Jean.
>> Thank you.
>> It's a pleasure
to be with you again.
>> Thank you.
Lovely to be with
you again, Jeffrey.
>> You used the term jump time
to refer to the present moment,
that something exhilarating
is taking place now,
something unique not only in
the history of human society,
but perhaps in the history
of evolution itself.
>> Well, yes, I actually
use this as a term,
but probably originally derives
from certain neo Darwinian
theory, Stephen Jay Gould
speaking of punctuated
equilibrium.
It's marvelous, the
sound and the voice.
>> Evolutionary leaps.
>> Well, the fossil record shows
things go along as they are
for a period of time.
And suddenly in relatively
few generations,
in terms of evolution zoom!
The fossil record
changes quite remarkably.
And so I'm taking
that whole notion
of punctuated equilibrium.
And I'm applying it to the human
species and the Earth process
that suddenly we are in
such a state of whole system
transition.
I mean, yesterday looks
nothing like tomorrow.
The maps don't
fit the territory,
that we really have
to speak about I'm
referring to as jump time.
The word, which seems to me
the drama behind the world.
I mean, never has
there been such a level
of widespread deconstruction
and reconstruction.
And I think that this
applies to human nature
as well, that our very nature
is in the process of transition.
>> Well, it's interesting to me
that with regard to the theory
of evolution, the creationists
use this idea of punctuated
equilibrium to say that there
must be some sort of divine
intervention taking place here.
>> Well, of course,
what could it be.
Whether it's a species at
the edge of its tolerance,
whether we're bored
with ourselves,
there's a kind of divine time
release capsule within us.
I think it belongs to
things that suddenly we
are technologically linked.
We are in a world of
colossal busy bodyness
through the internet
and other agencies.
The world mind is taking
a walk with itself,
that the crisis of
complexity is so great.
As the poet says, thank
God our time is now.
When wrong comes up to
meet us everywhere, never
to leap leave us.
So we take the longest
stride a soul folk ever took.
And I think it is that stride of
soul that is calling us forth,
that lure of becoming.
So whether it is the
push from the past
or the lure of the
future, whether it
is the god structure saying,
it's time to wake up now,
the hound of heaven
going woof, woof,
woof get on with it,
whatever it is, factor's
unique in human experience.
The rise of women to
full partnership with men
and the whole domain
of human affairs,
surely, the biggest
change in human history.
And this joined to other
just grim necessity
I think is the fact that
we are all attending
a wake for a way of being that
has been ours for hundreds,
if not thousands of years.
Now I am generally
optimistic because I
see patterns emerging.
And what I try to do in
my new book, "Jump Time,"
is to show what some
of these patterns are
and what we can do to
farm them in our lives
and in our communities.
>> I think suggest that people
conserve as conscious agents
to help mold the changes
that are taking place.
>> Yes, I believe that.
And I also talk about various
forces that are happening now.
I mean, I think there is a
kind of pulse from the Earth
and from the universe.
I mean, once we saw that picture
of the Earth from outer space,
we were no longer her baby.
We were her steward.
We were her partner.
And we are being pulsed I
think by universal forces.
Certainly the need to
repattern human nature.
And now that we know so much
about human development,
and it is subject that
you've talked about so much
on this program, we know what
we can do and what we can be.
We didn't know that before.
The regenesis of society.
Social structures
are breaking down
because they come from old
industrial or church written
societies.
Of the new
cosmology's certainly.
The very fact that the
breakdown of the membrane
between peoples.
We're living in a fusion world.
I have a chapter in it called
Walk and Roll in the rainbow
world.
>> Yes, new styles of food.
New styles--
>> Food.
>> --of music.
>> Music, literature.
I mean, we are
becoming polymorphous
perverse in our cultures.
We are hyphenated.
We are-- it's not just simply
Afro Cuban, chicano punk.
It's that hybrid sounds
for hybrid souls.
There's a kind of
cultural mitosis
that is going on that
is germinating literally
whole new social forms.
>> And the whole sense of
human identity is changing.
>> Very much so.
Yes, and human responsibility.
So it's some of these forces.
And then of course, the
breakthrough of the depths.
The zeit is getting geisted.
The spirit is rising.
Again, you have those
wonderful cultural fusions.
And the fact that you
can go to any supermarket
and find the secrets of
spiritual technologies
and the spirit and
the wisdom teachings
that before people would have to
spend their whole life looking
for.
>> Well, nothing like this
has ever happened quite
in the history of humanity.
>> No, never, never, not in
the history as we have it, no.
>> And so there's
some concern, I think,
as to whether people are capable
of expanding, of stretching,
of changing as fast as
everything around us is
changing, and is it
all for the good?
>> Well, I think that
we have responsibility.
We know that
progress is not as it
has been defined as just
scientific or technological
progress.
Otherwise, we will end
up in an apocalypse.
But progress is also values.
Progress is human deepening.
I know so because I travel so
much and see so many people.
I just see people waking
up to a sense of urgency.
And this whole sense that
you hear, it's like a mantra
all over the world.
What can I do?
What can I do to serve?
What can I be so that
I can serve better?
And my experience knows--
I know from my own work for
so many years, 35 years,
that given teaching, given
training, given opportunity
most people can realize
a much larger bandwidth
of human possibility.
They can learn to think
in images and words.
They can think with
their whole bodies.
They can orchestrate emotions.
They can enter into the vastness
of their inner space, which
is as large if not larger
than the outer space.
>> At the same time, there
is a backlash it seems.
>> Oh, always.
>> A reaction against.
>> Always a sunset
effect, always.
You cannot push the membrane
of the possible without having
backlash.
I mean, look what's
happening to women?
The incredible backlash to
women I find around those
all over the world.
And it's because the
rules and the situations,
the expectations of thousands
of years are suddenly changing.
Of course, there's a backlash.
And I think that's good.
And I mean it's not good.
But it can be
healthy if it makes
you ground yourself and find
greater definition of what
you want to do and
where you want to go
and what you want to be.
>> I, for example, I have
a situation where one
of my dearest friends, someone
I've known and loved for 30
years and traveled all
over the world with,
a woman who was an inspiration
to everybody who knew her
for 30 years, has had a, I guess
I'd call it a tragic reversal
and has become a
rabid anti-semite.
>> My goodness.
>> And I think that
this is partly--
>> Where is that coming from?
>> Yeah, is it part of some sort
of larger process of the group
psyche of the world
soul in some way.
>> Yeah, well, one of the things
that's happening is factors
that we're unconscious or
becoming conscious and that
if one does not achieve a kind
of balance and inner space,
then these repressed forces
that you've been sitting on can
emerge.
>> But isn't that
the case for us?
We're coming out
of Western culture.
We're coming out of, I think,
maybe the darkest century
of human kind.
>> A holocaust of centuries.
Never were there so many wars,
so many people killed, so much
antagonism.
I mean, part of it was just
that you never had the numbers.
>> And I don't think
we've digested that yet.
>> No, no, no.
When you look at the history or
the study of simpler societies,
they simply did
not have this level
of warfare and of antagonism.
We are dealing
with a complexity,
a level of complexity that
has overloaded our circuits.
I mean, I agree.
That's why I'm saying we
have to cook on more burners,
that we cannot--
one of my chapters
deals with personality.
I am a practitioner of a
very dubious art of making up
limericks on the spot.
If you give me two or three
words and a minute or so,
I can generally come up with
something, sometimes funny.
And not too long ago
somebody challenged me
from the audience.
They said, OK, Jean,
here's three words.
Duluth, Minnesota,
gender and drunk.
So I went into my
creative reverie.
And I came out with this little
metaphysical masterpiece.
A mean little man
from Duluth was
unclean and unkind and uncouth.
He went on a bender and while
drunk changed his gender
and is now our beloved Dr. Ruth.
Now what is implied here
is the fact that we have--
that we are shape shifters.
Since the Renaissance,
the dominant archetype
in the Western world
has been Prometheus.
He snatches fire from
heaven and from the Earth
and finds the secrets in nature.
But it's changing now I think
to Proteus, the shapeshifter
in this figure.
>> The god who can
turn into any form.
>> Can turn into anything.
And even as I said,
my little poem,
even changing one's
sexual identity
is not out of the question.
>> Hundreds of
people do it, yes.
>> Yeah, but the thing is
we live in such complexity,
that the frail craft of ego,
the little local self is really
very-- is insufficient to
deal with present complexity.
That's what we fracture.
We go neurotic.
Or we go fundamentalist.
Because we can't stand
the muchness of it.
Better by far that we take
on-- we become protean and take
on a much larger identity, which
includes being polyphrenic,
rather than schizophrenic,
where we have realized
that we have a huge group.
For example, if I
would ask you now--
>> Hold on just a second, Jean.
We're going to
take a short break.
We'll be back.
Welcome back to
"Thinking Aloud."
My guest is Jean Houston--
one of the world's great
treasures, frankly.
And we're talking about
society in transition.
You were about to pose
a question I believe.
>> Yes, I was.
I was going to ask
you if you really
look at how many
different selves you have,
different roles, just name some.
Name about 10 or 15.
>> Well, it wouldn't
be too hard I think.
>> Well, go ahead.
>> I'm a para psychologist.
I'm a clinical psychologist.
I'm a radio interviewer.
I'm a business man.
I'm a husband.
I'm a reader.
I'm a runner.
I'm a yoga practitioner.
I'm a son.
I'm a homeowner, a tax payer.
>> Now, go a little wilder
in other kinds of things.
>> I'm a ufo
researcher for example.
I'm a person who travels to
sacred sites at holy times.
I'm a person who
when I was a kid
I used to take
off all my clothes
and go up on the roof of my
house top and talk to God.
>> OK, and healer and meditator
and possibly cook and mechanic.
And--
>> They don't call me
Jeff the chef for nothing.
>> OK, there we go.
Now, and we would
probably have 40 or 50.
>> I could go on.
>> Now, if I were to say
to you name something,
one of the roles that you find
that you're not particularly
skilled at, just name anyone.
>> A typist.
>> OK, don't say typist.
Or writer isn't yours
like it is mine.
>> Guitarist.
I'm a terrible guitarist.
>> Guitarist, OK.
Let's take a guitarist, OK.
But Jeff the Chef, if you were
to bring Jeff the Chef forward,
and you took on the
guitar with the shades
and the subtleties
of Jeff the Chef,
you would not have
the usual kind
of blocking that you would
have as the musician.
For example, of my
many roles, the one
that I'm known for that I have
the worst possibly is writer.
Jean the little local
Jean is a lousy writer.
But Jean who is also a cook--
>> You fooled me.
>> No, but Jean the cook is not.
Jean, who is high like
you, a high kinesthetic--
and I'm a fencer--
I don't have
problems as a writer.
So what I do is I bridge
from one of my crew.
You see, this is a
polyphrenia, to a weakness.
And I don't have
the usual blocks
and the shibboleths and
the encapsulation's that I
would have.
Now, so that one of the
things that I talk about
is how do you develop all these
different persona in such a way
that they can come forward?
Because often they have
a gestalt of experience.
They have skills that have
been developed unconsciously
that your little local self
didn't know anything about.
So for example, not long
ago, I took up a violin.
Now, I'm not a violinist.
But I do have a deep
appreciation of music.
And I would take
on a part of myself
that could play the violin.
And I began to
learn quite rapidly.
I had a trainer who wanted me
to take lessons in baseball.
I hate baseball.
Football I understand.
Football is ritualistic.
It's mythic.
11 young heroes
carrying the holy egg
through the womb of the
goalpost while the air slots
virgins dance on the side.
Football I understand,
not baseball.
So what I did is I discovered
within myself Mickey Mantle,
who was the great champion--
>> A New York Yankee, sure.
>> --of my youth.
And so I assumed the
mantle of Mickey Mantle.
And I learned I'm pretty good.
I don't play baseball much.
But I'm good at grounders.
I throw very well.
My dogs absurdly happy
because the Frisbee
goes much further than it did.
So it's a sense of assuming
some of the qualities
of these different persona
that we have within us,
but directed by what
I call the entelechy.
The entelechy is
that divine self.
It is yourself as if
you'd had 1,000 years
to do your human homework.
It's the essence
self, the diamond self
in the Sufi religion.
>> It's a Greek term.
>> Entelechy, yes.
It's the entelechy of--
it's the divine.
It's a deep purposefulness.
It's the entelechy of a baby
to be a grown up human being.
>> Sort of like our
destiny calling out to us.
>> A higher pattern,
more than destiny,
because you don't
necessarily fulfill it.
It's the destiny of the
entelechy of an acorn
to be an oak tree,
of a popcorn kernel
to be a fully popped entity.
And of you and me to be
only our entelechy knows.
And so one of the things
I show is how do you
begin to have a sense of
that divine persona who
becomes the orchestrator
of these many, many parts
of ourselves?
And I show ways of doing that.
And then to let that--
the probable is
wonderful to emerge,
the higher pattern,
the deeper sense.
>> Well, ever since I
first met you, Jean,
which is nearly 30 years ago--
>> That's right.
>> Now, I have loved the way
you evoke that sense of that
there's something within
calling out to be born.
>> Do you want to do an
entelechy exercise, right?
>> Oh, well, all right, sure.
>> All right, so put
your hands up here.
>> Like this?
>> Yeah, and I want you to
imagine this entelechy self
in front of you, almost
as a palpable present.
As I said, yourself as
if you'd had 1,000 years
to do your human homework.
And this entelechy
has a deep sense
of you, a lovingness,
an understanding
of your potentials of your
past, of your possibilities,
of the pathways, and
is looking at you
and regarding you with
such absolute loving
sense of wonder.
And do you have a sense
of that entelechy?
>> Yeah.
>> I want you to move
slightly, just move slightly.
And in a sense, go into
the place of the entelechy.
OK, it's hard to
do it right here.
But we'll get that, OK.
And now you are the entelechy
looking at Jeff Mishlove.
And but you are looking from the
perspective of the entelechy,
and that entelechy is
regarding the human self.
And you are that entelechy
with that tremendous knowledge,
that tremendous sensibility,
that deep kindness looking
at local Jeff.
And can you do that?
>> Yeah.
>> Now go back to local Jeff
with hands to the entelechy
self, that high self, and begin
to even have even a more subtle
and yet more palpable sense of
being seen, of being empowered,
of being called forth,
evoked by the entelechy.
And what you would do is
you would go back and forth.
What do you feel now?
>> What a gift this is.
>> Tell me what you're feeling.
>> Well, the sense for me is
we talked earlier about all
of these many parts of myself,
and that there's some part
of me that understands all of
it, that sees the connections,
that realizes that this isn't
all just chance that I have
these various facets, that
they're coming together
for a reason, that there
is something unifying.
There's a unifying factor.
It's hard to
verbalize what it is.
But I had a sense of
it flowing, energizing.
>> Yes, and it energizes.
And then you would take
that entelechy self
and call forth Jeff the Cook.
[LAUGHTER]
You see, at the time
of doing the guitar.
And so you would bridge between
higher parts of yourself.
So that's just a
simple exercise.
>> What a gift you bring to
remind people of that enormous
potency.
>> Well, we remain as
mysteries to ourselves.
And part of my work is to
school you in the mystery
and to bring it
into time and space
so that we do become
adequate stewards
of this evolutionary
jump time in history.
>> And you have for decades
now been traveling all over
the world, calling forth
this innate potential,
this entelechy.
>> We are the lives of flies.
We have very short lives.
So by God we go out there
and we do what we can.
And I've been work--
yes, I work with people
individually and seminar
groups, and of course, even
with cultures.
>> Yeah, that's something--
>> In my group--
>> --to work with
a whole culture.
>> Well, it's not
You work with individuals
of the culture,
and then they work with others.
But what you do, for
example, is that you
say if I was working with the
Maoris, you appreciate them.
And you call forth their genius.
And you say my god, what
you have is so important.
And look at what you're doing
with your beautiful maraes,
the great houses of the
ritual and ceremonial
and your congregation.
Look at this
incredible language.
Look at this-- and you empower.
And then you bring
them to situations
where they were not empowered.
And you begin to show people
just how extraordinary they
are.
You re-appreciate them.
And then they begin to
deepen their culture.
And I've done this
in about 40 cultures.
>> For so many of
these cultures,
they have this inferiority
complex in comparison
to the affluence of the west
when their spiritual gifts may
be greater than ours.
>> Yeah, and so what I
show them is the affluence
of their culture compared
to often the inferiority
of the west.
>> And you do--
>> They have another bandwidth.
They just have a
larger bandwidth.
>> You do the same
thing with people.
>> I try.
I try.
>> You are a great inspiration
to me in your steadfast
insistence that there is no
such thing as psychopathology.
>> Well, I prefer
not to pathologies.
I always try to mythologize
and to look at the larger
story, the larger picture, the
many, many different patterns
of connection that are there
because I look at a person.
And I see who they are.
But I also see the great
story that is behind them.
I see you Krishna behind
those aviator glasses.
I saw you.
I see you, Parsifal.
Hey, Mary Magdalene.
How are you doing with
your clients these days?
And so one does see
the larger story.
And because you see it
and you hold it for them,
then they can begin
to release themselves
into that larger story.
>> Because we tend to get
caught up in the littleness
of our lives and
in the affairs--
>> Serial monotony.
>> --of the ego.
>> One darn thing
after another, yeah.
>> You're looking at everybody
from the mythic perspective.
>> Well, mythic or a larger
pattern of connection.
When you've had as
much experience,
I mean, I'm not putting
myself on a pedestal here.
But that isn't really true.
I've had a lot of experience.
And from that experience,
I try to bring
that to seeing a
person and placing them
in the larger story.
But anybody can
do it for anybody.
But the greatest gift that--
the greatest potential
there is for one person
to look at another and
say, I see you hole.
I do.
Yes, you may be involved
in what we might
refer to as unskilled behavior.
But there's just so
much more to you.
And I hold you in
that greatness.
In northern India,
they have a practice
where one person
will say to another,
oh, I'm in a time of
depression and dispair.
Will you be God for
me for three months?
Help me to hold on
to what I really am.
Oh, yes, Indeed.
I'll be God for you
for three months.
And so you have--
and I try to encourage
people to join
in teaching learning communities
that are also places where we
hold each other's dream
as well as to grow in
body, mind, and spirit.
>> Jean Houston, what a joy it
has been to share this program
with you and to feel renewed and
reawakened and touch with some
great entelechy
calling me forth.
Thanks so much
for being with me.
>> Thank you very much, Jeff.
>> And thank you
for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]